@item 1. Brace commands
Эти команды начинаются с @@ followed by a letter or a word, followed by an
argument within braces.  For example, the command @code{@@dfn} indicates
the introductory or defining use of a term; it is used as follows: @samp{In
Texinfo, @@@@-commands are @@dfn@{mark-up@} commands.}

@item 2. Line commands
These commands occupy an entire line.  The line starts with @@,
followed by the name of the command (a word); for example, @code{@@center}
or @code{@@cindex}.  If no argument is needed, the word is followed by
the end of the line.  If there is an argument, it is separated from
the command name by a space.  Braces are not used.

@item 3.
Команды блокировки Эти команды записываются в начале строки с общим текстом
в следующих строках, заканчивающимся соответствующей командой @code {@@ end}
на отдельной строке. Например, @code {@@ example}, затем строки примера
кодирования, затем @code {@@ end example}. Некоторые из этих команд блока
принимают аргументы в виде команд линии; например, @code {@@ enumerate A},
открывая среду, завершенную @code {@@ end enumerate}. Здесь @samp {A} -
аргумент.

stroka @[[:alpha:]]+{\\(@\\{1,2\\}[[:alpha:]]+}\\|@\\{1,2\\}[[:alpha:]]+\\)

@item 4. Symbol insertion commands with no arguments
These commands start with @@ followed by a word followed by a
left and right- brace.  These commands insert special symbols in
the document; they do not take arguments.  Some examples:
@code{@@dots@{@}} @result{} @samp{@dots{}}, @code{@@equiv@{@}}
@result{} @samp{@equiv{}}, @code{@@TeX@{@}} @result{} `@TeX{}', and
@code{@@bullet@{@}} @result{} @samp{@bullet{}}.
