CRYPTO(7)                           OpenSSL                          CRYPTO(7)

NAME
       crypto - OpenSSL cryptographic library

SYNOPSIS
       See the individual manual pages for details.

DESCRIPTION
       The OpenSSL crypto library implements a wide range of cryptographic
       algorithms used in various Internet standards. The services provided by
       this library are used by the OpenSSL implementations of SSL, TLS and
       S/MIME, and they have also been used to implement SSH, OpenPGP, and
       other cryptographic standards.

       libcrypto consists of a number of sub-libraries that implement the
       individual algorithms.

       The functionality includes symmetric encryption, public key
       cryptography and key agreement, certificate handling, cryptographic
       hash functions, cryptographic pseudo-random number generator, and
       various utilities.

NOTES
       Some of the newer functions follow a naming convention using the
       numbers 0 and 1. For example the functions:

        int X509_CRL_add0_revoked(X509_CRL *crl, X509_REVOKED *rev);
        int X509_add1_trust_object(X509 *x, const ASN1_OBJECT *obj);

       The 0 version uses the supplied structure pointer directly in the
       parent and it will be freed up when the parent is freed.  In the above
       example crl would be freed but rev would not.

       The 1 function uses a copy of the supplied structure pointer (or in
       some cases increases its link count) in the parent and so both (x and
       obj above) should be freed up.

RETURN VALUES
       See the individual manual pages for details.

SEE ALSO
       openssl(1), ssl(7)

COPYRIGHT
       Copyright 2000-2016 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

       Licensed under the OpenSSL license (the "License").  You may not use
       this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
       in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
       <https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

1.1.1a                            2018-11-20                         CRYPTO(7)
